There we go.
Great.
Hello.
Right then.
So, oh.
We're just trying this for the first time, because I need my hands later on.
So that morning, everyone, we are continuing, like Agua said, this series around unshakable, being unshakable people of faith.
And to do that for these next few weeks, we are looking at the life of Daniel.
If you don't know anything about Daniel, I'm going to read.
I don't know if you have one of these, a study Bible.
If you haven't got one, I'd highly recommend you get your hands on one.
But anyway, at the beginning of each chapter, in this particular study bible, there is a page, but literally about just the background of the book where it's come from.
And I just wanna read you the intro to this study bible, in case you are not familiar with Daniel in this book.
It says this, and I feel like Daniel's such a great place to be looking, because there's such like parallels with the world that we find ourselves in today.
It says this,
An earthquake shakes the foundations of our security.
A tornado blows away a lifetime of treasures.
An assassin's bullet changes national history.
A drunk driver's claims, an innocent victim.
A divorce shatters a home.
International and personal tragedies make our world seem a fearful place, overflowing with evil and seeming the out of control.
An a litany of bombings, coups, murders and natural disasters
could cause us to think that God is absent or impotent.
Where is God?
We cry.
Engulf by sorrow and despair.
25 centuries ago, Daniel could have despaired.
He and thousands of his countrymen had been deported to a foreign land after Judah had conquered.
Daniel found himself facing an egocentric leader and surrounded by our doloters.
Instead of giving in or giving up, this courageous young man held fast to his faith in God.
Daniel knew that despite the circumstances, God was sovereign and was working out his plan for nations and individuals.
The Book of Daniel centers around this profound truth, the sovereignty of God.
And the key verse in the book of Daniel says this, praise be to the name of God forever and ever.
Wisdom and power are his.
He changes times and seasons.
He deposes kings and raises up others.
He gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to the discerning.
He reveals deep and hidden things.
He knows what lies in darkness and light dwells with him.
Those are the words that Daniel wrote, and they capture the essence of this book of the Bible.
And I love this.
I love this scripture.
I love this book.
This book, scripture is foundational and powerful today.
And in the life of Daniel, we learn so much about God.
and about the way that we should live.
And we can look to him as an example.
And last week, John spoke about this, how Daniel's unshakable faith began with a quiet decision and this resolve to continue to look to God.
And John had that beautiful picture of that.
Thank you, Lighthouse, just off the coast to think of Ireland.
And he said that the bricks had been designed in a certain way, like hundreds of years ago, and it withstands storms.
Now, I'm afraid, I'm not quite as imaginative.
And when I was getting ready for this week, we are onto rhythms, unshakable rhythms.
I couldn't think of a good picture.
So I think, so it's blank.
So maybe we'll come back to that.
Maybe you'll think of a picture that should be there for yourself.
So last week was about Daniel's quiet decision under incredible pressure.
He resolved in his heart to honor God.
And he had these challenges that came at him and then he resolved.
You know, he was taken from his home into a culture that tried to rename him, tried to reshape him, tried to redefine him, change his identity, change his language, change his very values.
And yet Daniel said, I belong to God.
His decision showed up not in one big moment, but in these everyday choices and in small, godly, faithful habits.
And today we're looking at those rhythms of Daniel's life.
He was a young Jewish man and he found favour with the king in this new land that he was in.
But that made him a bit of a target because people were jealous.
Daniel's found favour with the king.
Let's get rid of him kind of thing.
They were jealous and they conspired against him.
And in an effort to discredit Daniel, these colleagues of his convinced the king to issue a decree stating that anyone who prayed to God, any God or man other than the king, that they would be thrown into a den of lions.
And we're going to be in chapter six this week, but chapter nine is coming.
And Daniel six, chapter 10 says this.
Now, when Daniel learned that the decree had been published, he went home to his upstairs room where the windows opened towards Jerusalem.
Three times a day, he got down on his knees and he prayed, giving thanks to God, just as he had done before.
That phrase, just as he had done before.
He was continuing to pray to God three times a day, refusing to compromise his faith.
Daniel didn't start praying when the danger appeared, when he's looking face to face at the lines, which is gonna come.
That's not when it started.
He didn't suddenly reach the panic button and suddenly reach out for God.
Where are you?
He kept praying because prayer was already his rhythm.
Just take a moment.
Are you encouraged by that?
Are you challenged by that?
The lion's den didn't create Daniel's faith.
It revealed it.
His rhythms of praying of this godly rhythm, just as he had always been doing, was the foundation of his unshakable faith.
Decisions might shape the direction we go in, but godly rhythms, things like prayer, things like reading scripture,
Things like taking a Sabbath, meeting with others to worship regularly.
Things like those, those rhythms over time build resilient faith and there's no shortcut to it.
So rhythms are about relationship and not
religion.
And for some of us, when I talk about rhythms, or you might think of spiritual disciplines, that might feel like heavy.
And you might be thinking, oh, man, I'm hearing, try harder, do more, be better.
But that is not what Jesus is asking of us.
He invites us into abiding.
John 15, Jesus says, remain in me.
as I also remain in you.
Apart from me, you can do nothing.
Jesus doesn't say, achieve more, do more.
He says, come, stay close, come and stay close to me.
You see, these rhythms I'm gonna talk about, they don't earn God's presence.
They help us stay aware of him and they help us to join him as a son
as a daughter.
And if you'll hear this morning and you don't know that, there's an invitation that Jesus has come.
I've made a way to the Father.
You can be sons and daughters of God.
Even Jesus had rhythms.
If anyone could have skipped rhythms, you would think it would be Jesus, the Son of God, wouldn't you?
But Mark 1 tells us very early in the morning, while it was still dark, Jesus got up
left the house and went off to a solitary place where he prayed.
And that wasn't an occasional thing.
It was a pattern.
Jesus withdrew regularly.
He prayed regularly.
He made space in the busyness.
I can't imagine how busy Jesus his life was as he went from place to place and people got word that he was in town.
He must have been so busy, but he consistently and regularly drew aside to be with his father and to pray.
because God's power, God's presence flows from intimacy with Him.
And if Jesus needed rhythms, then so do we.
I act so do I.
We all do.
I've had my own experience this month of rhythms, not the kind I'm talking about today, although there is a parallel.
I have started running.
Yes, I have.
There was a charity.
Hang on a minute.
I got a medal in the post yesterday.
I brought it just to show off.
Sorry.
Look at this.
Oh, yeah, I know.
Hang on.
Yeah, I've heard that.
Oh, thank you.
So, rhythms can do us good.
Not just spiritually good, but physically good.
And last year, there's a fantastic charity that we're doing this challenge.
It runs 31 miles in January.
And I thought, I can do that.
I can be a bit of a spur of the moment.
Yeah, I'll do that.
And then I thought about it.
And I thought, oh my goodness, my worst memory from school was cross-country running.
I don't know.
We used to have to do it in our gym knickers, bottle green gym knickers in the snow.
And I felt like I was literally going to like,
bring my hole in sides up.
The worst memory of schools cross-country running.
So I signed up and I tried couch to 5k once while it became couch to physio.
So that didn't work.
And then I found myself signed up getting messages saying, hey, great to have you on board, Nicola, here's your fundraising page.
I was like, right.
So before Christmas, I started going to the gym and do some leg presses and try and get my legs a bit stronger.
I thought, I wonder if I can jog a kilometer on a treadmill.
and I found I could, and I slowly got stronger.
Anyway, I finished my 31 miles, and I've kept going, and I raised 520, yeah, over 500 pounds for this child bereavement UK charity, and I got my medal yesterday, so I was quite proud of that.
But what I was thinking about, this rhythms, and I'm not gonna stop, I'm gonna keep going, because it has done me so much good.
But what made me think as well about this rhythm and this simple rhythm, it reminded me that of my dad, right?
So this January, as I was kind of working up the pace and getting on on the 21st of January, I texted my dad two miles today, two miles without stopping on a treadmill.
This is big news for me people.
I'd run two miles and it took 24 minutes, right?
And my dad replied, this,
He said, super sonic, which kind of made me laugh.
But I thought, that's my dad, my earthly father.
He was behind me, cheering me on.
And he thinks me running.
I can now do it in less than that, just saying.
But he thought it's super sonic.
And I thought, how much more?
Does my heavenly father, when I try and run this race, when I try and put rhythms in my life, he is saying, God, Nicola, go for it.
And that's just my dad.
And how much more my heavenly father loves it when we build in?
Our heavenly father loves it when we build in.
He encourages us on.
And spiritually, we need to build up rhythms over time.
and maybe to start for the first time and that's okay.
And if you're not sure how to start, that's okay too.
And today you're gonna go away with some helpful ideas and a massive encouragement to have a go.
So we're all invited to build some simple rhythms in our lives.
And it's not about adding pressure,
but it's about simple, sustainable rhythms and experimenting with them, whatever season you find yourself in.
I'll come back to that.
So Daniel's life, whole life was shaped by rhythms.
Sometimes we remember him just for the lions, but his life is full of these steady, important, faithful practices, this rhythm-shaped life, putting the best things, the most important things first.
And we sang, didn't we?
I will love you, Lord, my strength.
I will love you, Lord, my shield.
of you, Lord, forever, all my days, I will love you.
So three rhythms that we see in Daniel throughout scripture.
The first one is prayer.
Prayer doesn't have to be impressive and long, just faithful.
Sometimes prayer is simply God, I'm here.
Sometimes prayer is simply, oh God, will you help me?
Sometimes it's simply, thank you.
I know you're with me.
Sometimes it's come Holy Spirit.
And in different seasons, it can look different.
I remember being a sleep deprived mum of two little ones back in the day and thinking, God, I just, I don't have time to sit with you.
And I discovered that actually when I was out and out and about with the buggy, and Hannah was running by my side and Sarah was a newborn baby, when she would like touch things like toddlers do, you know, touch everything, don't they?
And I thought, I'm going to turn this into prayer.
And when Hannah would like stop and pick up leaves or any other
more probably more grossing on the floor.
I made a choice that I would turn that into a prayer and I would thank God for nature, thanking for that tree, thanking for that little hand that picked them up, I picked them up, like turn things into prayer around me.
Or one is feeding them in the middle of the night.
Just being aware of God's presence and turning my attention in the middle of the night.
You might be that your life is really busy, you know, I understand that.
One thing I've started doing this past year is to speak in tongues when I'm driving the car, just to speak out, just to sing out.
And so often that just turns into me looking at the sky as well as the road.
I'm just aware of God, like just in the clouds, the amazing creation and just praising Him.
You know, you have to think about it just praying in those places.
What can work for you?
in terms of prayer.
So one rhythm was prayer.
Another rhythm was scripture.
Daniel knew the scriptures.
He knew who God was and he knew who he was and he knew what to do because he was familiar with the Old Testament teachings.
Scripture is so important for us to get into.
It roots us in truth.
of who God is, who we are, and what we are to do, just like Daniel.
God's word, the Bible says, is a lamp to our feet.
In Ephesians, a scripture is talked about as being a sword of the Spirit, the only offensive weapon in the armor of God that you read about, in Ephesians.
This so important, Matthew 24, heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
Two Timothy,
Three, 16 and 17, Timothy writes to the early church, all scripture is God breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting, training and righteousness so that the servant of God may be thoroughly equipped for every good work.
We can be thoroughly equipped by the word of God.
Even a small little daily reading can form stability in our lives over time.
He doesn't have to be, you know, read the whole Bible this year.
And if you're doing that, fantastic, fantastic.
But if you're not, and if you think, well, I don't even know where to start, just start with a little bit.
A few years ago, we had a sabbatical and I literally lived in Matthew chapter six, one chapter of the whole Bible for three months.
And I
And I meditated on it like verse by verse and read the scripture and let scripture read me.
God by his spirit helps us to understand and helps us to live lives that are shaped by his word.
You can listen to it.
Not everybody is a keen reader.
Not everyone can read very well.
Be can read it.
You can have it on your phone.
The Bible app is
It's free, just can get it on your phone.
There's podcasts where people are explaining scripture.
Have a book in your bag.
I'm going to show you my book in my bag.
If ever I find myself waiting for one of the kids to come out of a club or an appointment or whatever, or I'm somewhere doing something, I've got a book.
This is really good.
Fearless daughters of the Bible, right?
Chapter, you can take one chapter and it talks about a woman in scripture who God
has used in various ways and it's like dead easy but it opens up scripture and it explains and it inspires me and it changes me maybe you could have a book in your bag or on your iPad or whatever you know i'm not too techie where could you build a rhythm of reading the scripture and letting scripture read you maybe between lectures maybe there might be one
lunchtime at work where you have a longer lunch break.
Maybe you finish early on a certain day.
Maybe when you come back from the school run, instead of getting straight on with the hoovering, you can say, I'm going to stop, I'm going to breathe, and I'm going to, I'm going to turn my attention to the Word of God, because it's powerful, because it's full of truth.
Didn't John Wesley's mom used to put an apron over her head to disappear and have some space away from all the kids?
I think she did.
So prayer, scripture and worship.
Worship.
Oh, thank you, Jo and the band this morning.
But worship resenters us.
It reminds us who God is and who we're not.
Worship brings perspective and it is powerful just as prayer, just as the scripture is.
Worships often thought of as an act of reverence and adoration towards God, which it is.
But actually, in the Bible, in the narrative, it emerges as a powerful spiritual weapon.
Because it shifts the focus from earthly challenges to God's divine sovereignty, worship ushes in the kingdom of God, God's presence and his power.
And the Bible gives us examples of where worship has been like a catalyst for God to move, for his spirit to come.
He receives our worship.
He's made us to worship with all that we are, whole-hearted worship.
In the Old Testament,
Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, he was faced with a formidable alliance of enemies.
And Jehoshaphat sought the Lord through prayer and fasting.
And then in response, God instructed him to position singers ahead of the army to praise the Lord.
And as they began to praise, the Lord set ambushes against the enemies leading to their defeat.
This is what Two Chronicles 20, 21, 22 says.
Then he consulted with the people and appointed those who could sing to the Lord and praise the splendor of his holiness.
As they went out before the army, they were singing, give thanks to the Lord, for his loving devotion endures forever.
The moment they began their shouts and praises, the Lord's their ambushes against the men of Ammon, Moab and Mountsia, who had come against Judah and they were defeated.
I want to encourage us all, make worship a rhythm somehow.
Listen to worship music.
I don't know if you've got, and I won't say it because if anyone's watching on the live stream, the house will be going crazy.
But I bought one for £10 on Facebook Marketplace, and I just tell her, when I'm in the kitchen, play worship music.
And she does it.
She tries to sell me
whatever music package I say, no.
And then she goes, OK, here's this playlist.
And it just throws worship music at me.
And I love it.
Maybe you could get Anne.
And you could do the same.
But this rhythm is an invisible weapon in our hands.
YouTube, why not?
Yesterday, we went for a walk in the sun, Dave and I.
Here's the evidence.
There we go.
There it is.
It was there.
The sun was out at New Begin.
Afen Darren were excited wherever you were on the moors.
There was a picture on Facebook.
The sun was out there yesterday as well.
It was dead funny.
People on the beach were like, come on in, come on in.
And they were taking pictures of the sun.
It was brilliant.
But the reason I tell you that is part of our rhythm is to go for a walk.
And then we both have our bags.
And he has a different book to me.
And we go to a coffee shop.
And I just
logged on to their Wi-Fi and had, we're not very sociable when we do this particular rhythm, but we are hand in hand on the beach.
And then we get to the coffee shop and we go, see you later.
And I get worship music in my ears and I'm reading my book and he's journaling or whatever.
What's your rhythm look like?
You could do that.
I mean, it's easy to do, but it's become part of a rhythm.
Worship re-centers a song God.
It's a weapon against the schemes of the enemy, against anxiety, against despair.
It's an important rhythm.
We experience it every Sunday when we join together, but there's so much more.
And worship looks like you as well, not just song.
For me as well, I love walking in nature and just looking and asking God, what is it that you want to speak to me through?
And sometimes, I mean, I won't.
I won't tell you all, but one season I have like a scrapbook and I took photos and I printed them out and I wrote verses and what it was that God was saying to me underneath.
And whatever works for you, do it.
And it'll be different maybe this year than it was 10 years ago, but try a new thing.
Journaling, I don't know whatever it is.
You are made to worship, express your worship and your adoration to God.
And why not swing by fireplace?
This Lent, JoJo, is doing a whole bunch of sessions, whereas my glasses still got the whole not seeing the close up things with the glasses on thing going on.
February the 20th, 6th of March, 13th of March, 20th of March here, half seven to half nine, a chance to come together and worship and refocus and look towards Easter as we travel through Lent with a special one day service that we're going to have going on as well.
make worship even more of a rhythm in your life.
It is powerful.
Wheatly rhythms matter as well.
So we've got prayer, scripture, worship, weekly rhythms, monthly rhythms, yearly rhythms.
Daniel didn't walk alone, neither did Jesus.
So the reason we say join a life group is because it's not good for us to walk alone.
gather with others to worship, to pray, it shapes us.
Unshakable faith grows in community.
And these rhythms, we encourage each other together.
Don't slip out of the habit.
And if you're not in a life group, join one.
And if you have, prioritize it, be there because it's a rhythm that is good for you.
Someone wants to describe this whole rhythm thing like this.
You might have seen this before.
Bear with, but if this is you, this is you, this is your life, okay?
If I was to say, okay, an important rhythm for me is going to be that I am gonna wake up in the morning and instead of flick to Facebook or the news app, I am gonna say, good morning to my Heavenly Father who has been watching over me while I sleep, who loves me, who cares for me.
That's what I'm working on, by the way.
Often I go, right, that is what I want to do.
And I don't.
But I want to.
But yeah, that's a rhythm that you might say.
That might be a rhythm or I'm going to take a Sabbath because God has made us.
to take a Sabbath.
It's good for us to have a day where we cease our work, cease our activity, and we look to Him.
And this might be that lunchtime on a Friday that maybe I have a bit longer, and I'm going to choose to listen to a podcast about prayer.
This might be that Bible reading book that I've been meaning to get round to doing.
I'm going to put that in.
This might be
Why does it flew in?
I don't know.
That might be, I'm gonna be at church on Sundays, every Sunday.
I'm gonna choose to be there.
I'm gonna choose to worship, choose to be in a life group, choose to invest in those godly friendships, deep spiritual friendships that Adam and Lucy spoke about.
I'm gonna actually phone up someone I know and say, hey, can we pray together?
Maybe every couple of weeks.
Can we just pray even if it's over the phone?
And then go the important things in our lives.
And then around the habits.
Oh, here we go.
Here's daily life.
Here's the dishwasher being filled up.
Here's the shopping.
Here's the school pick-ups.
Here's the
emails here's the what oh here's the housework here's the closing cup of doors after your wife thank you for that it's true up to the bins
Make it a bed.
Oh, very house-trained.
Here's the worrying about my elderly parents.
Here's the being distracted and hurried and overwhelmed.
If we'd put all of those things in first, the rocks wouldn't have fitted.
The rhythms, these important things, what we do each week to
take a Sabbath to actually have a download something on my phone that's gonna help me walk close with Jesus.
They need to be in there first.
And maybe for some of you you're like, yeah, they are.
And I know they are in this room.
There are people who've got them in and they're going for it.
Amazing.
But there are others.
And, you know, sometimes I feel like for me, to be honest, sometimes a few of these, I sort of let them come out.
And then actually it's really hard to get them back in.
And then you've got like, okay, right, let me sort this out.
God, will you help me?
How we sort this rhythm out?
Because you will miss days.
You will miss opportunities.
You will drift.
We are human.
I find it hard.
But God is not disappointed with you.
He says, you're supersonic.
You're amazing.
I love it.
I love that you're trying to do this.
He's not disappointed.
He loves you.
Rhythms don't keep us close to God.
God is already close, but these rhythms are an invitation for us to just be more and more aware.
So it's not guilt here, but I just want to invite you to rethink what does it mean for you to remain in Jesus, to remain in Him?
in some of these ways.
He is full of compassion to you.
I have prepared some sheets which have some hopefully handy.
I mean, it's just literally a few ideas, but there's so many more.
And the host team are going to bring them around.
I didn't give them out before because I knew everyone would be fiddling.
But on them are some hopefully some helpful resource suggestions.
If you want to focus on prayer and think, that's a rock I want to put in my life, there's a book recommendation there, How to Pray by Pete Greek.
You can click on there and it takes you straight to an online bookshop that you can buy it from.
If you think I'd like to read some more articles about prayer, that takes you to a Vineyard Church's website about prayer.
If you think, I want to go deeper or I want to do something different, there's a prayer course.
that's on there, you can do it on your own or you can get a friend and say, hey, let's do this together.
If you're not sure where to start with reading the Bible, there's a few suggestions.
If you're not sure how to stop and spend time with God, there's a free app, Lectio 365.
I love it.
Try and do that most days.
And there's actually morning, noon and evening on that one, but you can just dip into it.
All of them are free.
And then there's a couple of book recommendations as well.
That you're going away with some things that hopefully can practically help, okay?
And just click on whatever you fancy and give it a go.
What would it look like for you and me to choose these faithful rhythms like Daniel?
Not perfect, but present.
Unshakable godly lives are built on ordinary days.
rhythm shape who we are and who we become, and they form resilience in us.
So I want to encourage you before storms hit, make time to put some even better rhythms in place.
Daniel was already anchored.
So I also was thinking, in around AD 60, Peter writes to the first Christians,
cast your anxiety on him because he cares for you.
Be sober minded and alert.
This is why I thought lions.
Your adversary, the devil, prowls around like a roaring lion seeking someone to devour.
Resist him, stand firm in your faith and in the knowledge that your brothers throughout the world are undergoing the same kind of suffering.
These practices, these rhythms are how we go on the offensive.
We have an enemy.
He wants us to not have these rhythms.
He wants our lives to be full of the sand, to be full of the activity, to be full of the hurry, to be full of the worry.
And Jesus says, no, do this first.
The whole of scripture says, do this first.
And that's why I want to encourage us today.
So we're going to just spend some time responding personally to whatever it is that God has highlighted to you as I've been talking.
When I was in the gym in December, just beginning this journey that I've been on, I was looking around and feeling actually a bit out of place.
I could see muscles, I could see, what do you call it, when you can go run for age?
Endurance, I saw muscles, I could see endurance.
And I felt a bit inferior actually, especially after a conversation I had with someone who was about to do their seventh marathon, somewhere in Japan or something.
And I thought, you know, looking sideways, that kind of comparison is no good.
I actually spoke to one man who was really sweet, gave me some top tips and even shook my hand afterwards.
They were really nice, but that's the gym people.
How much more can we encourage one another on?
No, we're not judging one another, but we want to encourage her to stand firm and to remain in God, to grow as disciples whose lives look more and more like Jesus.
who taught us to have rhythms of prayer, reading the scripture, worship, gathering together.
So with that in mind, I wanna ask you, what rhythm?
Well, what has the Holy Spirit been staring you to today?
Because that stir is an invitation to move forward, even if it's just that much.
That's okay.
That's a start.
And because we're a family and because we should be just way more encouraging and loving than the random people I met in the gym, we're gonna do this together for a few minutes.
With a person next to you or someone that you know that you would like to talk to, maybe ask each other these questions.
What has the Holy Spirit stirred in you today about rhythms and listen to them?
Where's God inviting you?
Listen to them.
And what one step are you going to take towards that one thing this week?
And then simply, pray God's blessing.
When I say that, I mean ask the Holy Spirit to help them walk that step this week.
Ask the God's presence to be with them as they walk towards these rhythms, just as Daniel did.
and Holy Spirit is here, and we are a family.
And so that is, is that okay?
I'm like, yes, okay, great.
And while we're doing that, I wondered if Joe, would you mind singing worthy is your name?
Because it speaks of this, just you quietly in the background.
Thank you.
So five minutes before we have to go and get the kids,
impairs, if that's okay.
Don't have to do anything, but if you'd like to, I feel like it's an invitation to walk a bit more like Daniel did.
So I'm going to pray for us.
This could be a moment for some of you married couples who haven't actually talked about these things for some time in your lives.
These are crucial things.
So come Holy Spirit, as we minister to one another about the things of your kingdom, the things that are on your heart for us, the journey that you would like us to take, the rhythms that you would like us to have,
Would you come?
Would you help us to speak to one another, hear one another and bless one another in your name?
Oh, man.
Okay.
Go for it.